---
layout: page
title: Natural Language Processing for Educational Applications
permalink: /projects/educational_applications
description:
---

Technology is a big part of today's classrooms; both remote learning and the use of smart devices and computers in classrooms provide us the potential to harness advances in AI and NLP for enhancing teaching and learning.
<br><br>
We are interested in using NLP to understand and improve interactions between teachers and students. This involves studying classroom discourse and identifying effective teaching patterns with the goal of providing feedback to teachers, as well as developing intervention strategies to improve learning. This specific problem domain provides rich and varied challenges from the perspective of NLP research, especially dialogue understanding and generation. Classroom discussions involve multi-party conversations between many students and one (or few) teachers. Traditional approaches to dialogue understanding focus on task-oriented or open-domain dialogue which is typically between one human and a machine — consequently, these methods don't work as expected in this problem domain. Additionally, the structure of content in this domain is very different from what is typically seen in NLP datasets like Wikipedia or OntoNotes; teachers employ a variety of discourse strategies such as repetition, rhetorical and probing questions in order to convey concepts as well as encourage students to participate. We investigate how to develop models that can effectively understand such conversations.
<br><br>
Another important goal of our research here is to progress towards the development of an AI system that can serve as an interactive, collaborative partner to students. We envision such a system as being able to understand student discussions during collaborative problem solving, and being able to guide students towards having productive discussions that promote learning. For this purpose, our system should be able to generate dialogue that is content-specific, e.g., ask a question about a problem that students are discussing. We should also be able to generate dialogue that engages students, e.g., ask students if they agree with another student. To this end, we are working broadly on problems in both natural language understanding and generation as applied to discourse in an educational setting. We are collaborating with domain experts such as teachers, linguists, researchers in cognitive science and educational theory to develop robust, ethical models that can be deployed in classrooms. 

NALA is part of the NSF National AI Institute for Student-AI Teaming. More information about the AI Institute can be found <a href="https://www.colorado.edu/research/ai-institute/what-we-do" target="_blank">here</a>.
